# Gemini Protocol Mailing List

This is the rebuilt archive of the [Gemini](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gemini_(protocol)) Mailing List.

It is available as:

* [Clean, complete, and parsable mbox files](mbox/) containing the full contents all messages.
* (**Work in Progress**) A comprehensive HTML archive of the full contents of all messages 

Various sources were used to completely reconstruct the mailing list and make it available.

## History

The mailing list documents the design and evolution of the [Gemini protocol](https://geminiprotocol.net/docs/), gemtext, companion ideas like robots.txt, various clients and servers, the community as a whole, and much more. When new people learn about Gemini, they often have questions about certain design choices. The mailing list is a great resource into those choices.

This list was active from early 2019 until January 2022 when the server hosting the mailing list, `list.orbitalfox.eu`, suffered a hardware failure.

## Sources (and problems)

All sources used to reconstruct the archive are available in `sources/`. They came from a variety of places:

- [HTML versions of the mailing lists messages](https://web.archive.org/web/20211218034113/https://lists.orbitalfox.eu/archives/gemini/), generated by Mailman, captured by the Internet Archive's Wayback Machine.
- Yearly mbox archives, generated by Mailman, captured by the Internet Archive's Wayback Machine.
- Personal mbox files uploaded by members of the community after `list.orbitalfox.eu` went offline. ([gemini://rawtext.club/~nervuri/gemini-archive/mailing-list/](gemini://rawtext.club/~nervuri/gemini-archive/mailing-list/))

Unfortunately, many of these sources are incomplete or have errors:

* About 20% of all messages are missing from the Wayback machine's HTML captures. Messages from 2019 and late 2021 are especially spotty.
* The Date/Thread/Author pages from the Wayback machine don't contain links to all messages.
* Mbox files contain truncated messages or are unparsable due to [from-munging](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/mbox#mbox_family) or [escaping](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3676#section-4.4) issues.
* Mbox files mask sender names or addresses, which can break parsing.
* Mbox files contain duplicate messages.
* Later mbox files were uploaded by community members and contain MBs of superfluous MIME headers (spam score, DKIM, list action headers, etc.) which are many times larger than the message contents themselves. 

## Rebuilding the archive

### Mbox files

To create clean, complete, and parsable mbox files I:

* Restored the "From " message delimiter lines and "From: " MIME header lines.
* Removed 18 duplicate messages (messages with the same `Message-ID` header).
* Created a single mbox file for 2021 by combining the official Orbital Fox mbox archive with message from community uploaded mbox files.
* Restored 6 truncated messages due to "From " lines appears in message bodies.
* Removed superfluous MIME headers from community uploaded mbox files  (spam score, DKIM, list action headers) and normalized them to match the few headers Orbital Fox's mbox files used: `From`, `Date`, `Subject`, `In-Reply-To`, `References`, and `Message-ID`.

Additionally, I added a three custom MIME headers to help link messages in the mbox files to the corresponding message in the original HTML archive. Here is an example:

```
X-Orbital-Fox-Message-Number: 15
X-Orbital-Fox-Url: https://lists.orbitalfox.eu/archives/gemini/2019/000015.html
X-Orbital-Fox-Message-Number-Source: Wayback Machine
```

* `X-Orbital-Fox-Message-Number` - The message number what was assigned to this message by Orbital Fox's Mailman instance.
* `X-Orbital-Fox-Url` - The URL for this message in the original Orbital Fox HTML archive.
* `X-Orbital-Fox-Message-Number-Source` - How I determined the number used for this message. Most have a value of `Wayback Machine` because references in the HTMTL saved in the Wayback Machine identified it. For 62 messages at the very end 2022, the value is `Computed` as the message number could was determined based on its date, order, context, and other clues.



